---
title: "Why I Stopped Using Windows"
date: 2020-08-22T12:21:14-05:00
draft: true
tags:
  - Opinion
  - Narrative
---

Let's get something out of the way first, I used to *love* Windows, I admit, however, that it was an "ignorant bliss" kind of thing, but back then I didn't really know much better. I started liking Windows even more when I began using some of it's hidden, "power user oriented" features, such as the built in window managed and multitasking capabilities. And while I did have quite a good time in my years using Windows, reality dawned on me in early 2020. I began noticing many things that were just unacceptable about an operating system that makes up the vast majority of the market share that it is part of. Some of the reasons were mere annoyances, others were ethical concerns. Not only that, I had started learning more and more about an alternative to Windows, more on that later though. In this article I plan on talking in more detail about this, why I decided to stop using Microsoft's operating system and moved on to something far, far better.

**To those of you more advanced readers, let me clarify beforehand that I am discussing this topic from a more casual viewpoint, so you won't hear me talking about the flaws in the NT kernel or some of the other things that are wrong with the literal foundation that Windows is built upon, this is meant to be an experience that is relatable to the average user.**

## What's wrong with Windows?
I will divide this subsection into 5 categories and talk about them separately:
  1. Slow, bloated interface, terrible UI design
  2. Many security and privacy issues, constant spying from Microsoft
  3. Software base being almost completely proprietary
  4. Lack of control over system, too much going on without user consent
  5. Other, more miscellaneous concerns

### Slow, bloated Interface, terrible UI design

> Since design is a subjective topic, this section will be regarded as the "least important", some will agree with what I say but some might not, keep this in mind as you read

One of the things that I noticed while using Windows on a daily basis was just how terrible the design could be sometimes. It felt like there was no real effort put into the interface of Windows. I was constantly changing the look & feel of my system using 3rd party programs like theme patchers to make the experience even tolerable. Buttons are misaligned all over, there is no consistency to the implementation of animations and other visual effects throughout the desktop, and worst of all, some of the less used interfaces still have design elements from older versions of Windows. One of the prime examples of this is Microsoft's Outlook email client, which still uses [Windows XP dialogs](https://i.postimg.cc/Rh4gmHG8/Outlook-DV-Settings.jpg) for some of the account settings menus. And if you've ever dived into the more advanced windows settings like the control panel and device management programs, you've also most likely seen the Windows 7-esque design used there. And to top things off, there isn't much you can do to change these things, since the only real customization options that Microsoft provides are:
  - Changing the desktop wallpaper
  - Arranging desktop icons
  - Adding items (only launchers so far) to the taskbar
  - And changing the single global accent color, which only a handful of Windows Apps actually use

And along with being terribly designed, the interface of Windows is also slow and bloated, with some animations taking seemingly forever to finish. Cool effects and transitions are fine and all, but if you ever try to get anything done fast in Windows, you will have a hard time if you are waiting 2-3 seconds for something like the Start Menu to open up. And speaking of the Start menu, not only is it slow, it provides no helpful features at a glance and requires you to spend considerable time scrolling or searching to actually find anything. On top of that it is filled with ads and publications, which are put there without any user consent whatsoever. All of these features actually end up causing harm as well. Microsoft's developers have implemented almost no optimization into their interface, so even simple operations use up ridiculous amounts of system resources. Just idling your Windows desktop after boot uses up a whopping 1.4-20 gigabytes of RAM and anywhere from 15-40 percent of your CPU, depending on the strength of your hardware of course. This not only makes Windows a torturous experience to use on weaker machines, but also slows some of them down because of the constant stress the computers are in. And if you were to look closer, which I highly advise you don't for your own good, you would find many misaligned texts, badly places lines, boxes out of order etc. the Windows user interface is an absolute mess, and the saddest part is that this terrible experience, something I wouldn't even be bothered to use for free, costs 120 glorious US dollars...

### Many security and privacy issues, constant spying from Microsoft
It is well known how easy it is to create viruses and harmful malware for Windows computers. Due to the amount of market share the operating system has, the vast majority of hackers have no reason to worry about anything else, since so many of their targets are vulnerable on Windows. Microsoft has a history of being slow with security updates and has yet to find solutions to some very critical issues. The inbuilt security of Windows is also not effective against this, with "Windows Defender" doing almost nothing to protect your computer, and, in some cases, is a hindrance to the usability of your machine.

### Software base being almost completely proprietary
If you are someone who likes to use many different kinds of software, you have most likely experienced the frustration that is finding good free and open source software on Windows. It's just plain hard to find, the proprietary giants like Microsoft, Google, Adobe, and others have extended their vice grip over the platform to the point that not using their software is an almost objective disadvantage in some cases. And where there is software available, much of what is available is proprietary. Not only is installing good software hard, a lot of the terrible software on a Windows computer comes preinstalled, and furthermore, the user can't even do anything about it. Some good examples of this is Microsoft's suite of office applications (which constantly bug you with subscription offers) and collection of basic software like "Photos". There are even games and advertisements that are on your computer from the same time as your Windows Installation. None of this software is open source and little is known about the true purpose of some of it. This makes Windows an especially frustrating experience to use for anyone who (sensibly) isn't willing to dish out big bucks for basic software or computer tools, most of which fail to be worth their price and are usually bloated and slow. Some examples of these can be (once again), Microsoft's Office Suite, Adobe's Acrobat Tools, subscriptions for any "premium utility" and many other "productivity" apps you frequently hear about. **Knowing how hard it is sometimes to find good alternatives to paid software on Windows, I've tried to produce a list of some good choices to use, these have all been verified and used by me, expect another post on that topic by me very soon.** A more concerning topic, however, is that this proprietary mindset has managed to spread into one of the most delicate regions of Windows software, Anti-Viruses. Most free ones are nearly the verge of being useless and demand far too many system resources. Avast, for example, can cause even my (fairly) fast computer to slow down a very noticeable amount. The same thing happens with other "background protection services" from organizations like Malwarebytes and McAfee. Most of them just run pointlessly (perhaps even maliciously) in the background and slow down your computer. Aside from anti-viruses, many other important settings and utilities are hidden away from the user (see next subsection), sometimes so well that other companies can use this to sell software that does things already available in Windows. An example of this is partition management tools, most users are unaware of utilities like `dispart` and the Windows Partition manager, this results in many partition managing apps being marketer, a lot of which, ironically, are just frontends for Windows' in-build partition management system. In short, the current state of Windows and proprietary software is not looking great, and it doesn't bode well for the future either. Since as more and more of these tech giants demolish their smaller free and open-source rivals, Windows becomes more of a trap for it's current users.

### Lack of control over system, too much going on without user consent
It's almost as if Windows is designed to be as unintuitive and unusable as possible, with as little control being given to the user as possible whenever there is a chance. You can't control or delay (up to a certain extent) Windows updates, nor can you uninstall most of the programs that come with the computer. This gets more and more annoying as Windows updates come and go, since even if you manage to debloat your system a little bit, it all gets reinstalled when the next update comes around. These updates are a pretty big nuisance as well. You can barely delay them, and when they do come, they can take up to 6 hours to finish and leave your system in an unusable state during that time, and due to their suddenness, some apps may not work for a bit after a recent Windows Update. 

### Other, more miscellaneous concerns
> This section is almost completely my own opinion, you are free to skip it if you don't feel like listening to a rant


## Now, Why is Linux any better?
This subsection too, will be divided into these categories:
  1. No single operating systems, many distributions to choose from for virtually any purpose
  2. UI and design has infinite customization potential, there is virtually no limit, and thus, no complaint
  3. Completely open and secure, everything is known to the user, no corporate ownership
  4. Completely open source and free software base, almost too many options to choose from sometimes
  5. Absolute control over system, nothing is inaccessible to the user

### No single operating systems, many distributions to choose from for almost any purpose
Most people who use Windows have absolutely no idea of the code that was used to create the operating system that they use, everything is hidden away in binaries and the original Windows disk image. The case with Linux is nowhere near this, if you wanted to, you could go right now and [view every line of code](https://github.com/torvalds/linux) in the Linux Kernel yourself, perhaps even get into a nice conversation with one of the many community based maintainers of it. Though what you see there is not going to be the Linux that you use, it is simply the kernel that "Distributions" are built upon. When choosing between these distros, you have almost infinite options. Want something stable and reliable for something like a server? Try Debian Stable or OpenSUSE. Like living on the edge and having the latest features and software? Give Arch Linux a try. Interested in Gaming and and easy to use interface? Try System76's POP_OS!. And, if you just want something that works out of the box and gives you a usable and customizable system, try anything like Zorin, Solus, Ubuntu, Manjaro, Linux Mint or hundreds of other choices. There is a distro for almost any purpose, making Linux one of the most extensible, reliable, and usable operating systems ever. The main point here is not just how many features you have, it's that you are provided complete choice and control over your computer and what you install on it. Something that Windows is notorious for not providing.

### UI and design has infinite customization potential, there is virtually no limit, and thus, no complaint
Linux offers an almost absurd collection of different desktop environments and window managers, each being completely different and having their own upsides and downsides. There, quite literally, is something for everyone's workflow. If you are still skeptic of what I am saying, check out some of the desktops on [r/unixporn](https://reddit.com/r/unixporn), you'll be fascinated by some of the things that are possible. And for those of you who don't want to spend hours configuring your system, don't worry, desktop environments like [GNOME](https://www.gnome.org/) and [KDE](https://kde.org/) are designed to be optimized right out of the box, with many beautiful and simple to install themes available to the user. Looking for something similar to the Windows UI? Try out [Cinnamon](https://github.com/linuxmint/Cinnamon), another desktop environment designed with the newly converted Windows user in mind. Have a slower computer? Try giving [Xfce](https://xfce.org/) and [lxqt](https://lxqt.github.io/) a try, both of which are targeted towards weaker machines. Or, even better, go minimalist with a Window Manager (like me), and find your workflow and efficiency reach new heights. All of the things that I have mentioned also treat your computer far better then windows UI, with the only thing coming close being the massive GNOME, which can use up to 900mb of ram, still trivial compared to what Windows uses. I could go on for hours about the how amazing user interfaces on Linux are, but I'm sure you get the point, there is almost no competition here.

### Completely transparent and secure, everything is known to the user, no corporate ownership
One of the main problems that windows had was it's corporate ownership. Almost everything that Microsoft did for the operating system and/or it's users had a financial incentive behind it. Now while this isn't inherently a bad thing (companies have to make money somehow), the methods Microsoft employed aren't the most ethical and this have made many users, including me, look for something more morally sound. Linux provides exactly that. With most of it's distributions being

### Completely open source and free software base, almost too many options to choose from sometimes

### Absolute control over system, nothing is inaccessible to the user

## Final note
